update/api-core-tests guide for writing tests (#35978)
woocommerce/woocommerce: plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/README.md

> ## Guide for writing tests

Reviewer: Should we briefly explain in this section that a test contains 3 different stages (`preconditions, action and validation`) and in concrete, in the case of API testing, we could extrapolate those sections to `data creation, request sending and response validation`?

This way we wouldn't assume that every person reading this section has knowledge of API testing or even general testing.

Author: I love this idea and will add a new section that references each of the stages, along with examples in the guide...

> When writing new tests, a good source on how to start writing and how to wire things up is to reference the other existing tests (found in the [tests](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/tree/trunk/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests) folder). Any data required for these tests should be located in an equivalent file in the [data](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/tree/trunk/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/data) folder.

Reviewer 2: Maybe here we can consider including some "good examples" (1-2) so folks have a good starting point when jumping in. We could include a test and how it uses the equivalent data file.

Minor wording change suggestions:

```suggestion
When writing new tests, a good source on how to get started is to reference the [existing tests](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/tree/trunk/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests). Data that is required for the tests should be located in an equivalent file in the [data](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/tree/trunk/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/data) folder.
```

Author: > Maybe here we can consider including some "good examples" (1-2) so folks have a good starting point when jumping in. We could include a test and how it uses the equivalent data file.
> 
Great suggestion - I'll get this in

> [Playwright docs](https://playwright.dev/docs/intro) is also a good source of learning. If you don’t understand a method, you’ll likely find more information here. The [API testing](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-api-testing) section has a good example on how the [playwright.config.js](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/trunk/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/playwright.config.js) is used (see [Configuration](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-api-testing#configuration) section) and also how [Setup and Teardown](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-api-testing#setup-and-teardown) works. 

Reviewer 2: Some minor wording suggestions:

```suggestion
The [Playwright documentation](https://playwright.dev/docs/intro) is a good source for finding out more details on the various methods used in the tests, including what is available to you when you write new tests. The [API testing](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-api-testing) section has a good example on how the [playwright.config.js](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/trunk/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/playwright.config.js) is used (see [Configuration](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-api-testing#configuration) section) and also how [Setup and Teardown](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-api-testing#setup-and-teardown) works. 
```

Note: Playwright uses the [expect](https://jestjs.io/docs/expect) library for test assertions. This library provides a lot of matchers like `toEqual`, `toContain`, `toHaveLength` and many more. Examples of these are throughout the test files.

## What aspects of the API should we test?

Assuming that we have validated the API contract (inspected the spec/contract, made sure the endpoints are correctly named, resources and types reflect the object model and there is no missing/duplicate functionality) we are ready to test. 

For each API request method (`GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, `DELETE`, `PATCH`), the test would need to take the following actions: 
1. Verify correct HTTP status code. For example, creating a resource should return 201 CREATED and unpermitted requests should return 403 FORBIDDEN, etc.

> 2. Verify response payload. Check valid JSON body and correct field names, types, and values — including error responses.

Reviewer: I think we could extend a little bit this 2nd point with a technical detail to be a bit redundant on what to check in the JSON response. We could say something like:
```
2. Verify response payload. Check the JSON body is valid and field names, types, and values are correct (i.e. check the response payload schema is implemented according to the specification) — including error responses.
```
Note: I took the liberty of changing some words in the example above to make the sentence more readable and easier to understand (at least for me, as a non-native English speaker). Feel free to discard this wording change if you don't find it relevant!

3. Verify response headers where appropriate e.g. Some headers hold information related to search totals, pagination values etc. (see [Examples](#examples) below).

At a minimum, we want to ensure each possible CRUD operation can be applied and sufficient assertions have been validated based on the above. 

A reasonable process would be:
1. Create an object using a `POST` request
2. Retrieve the created object using the `GET` request
3. Update the object using a `POST` request
4. Delete the object using a `DELETE`request

> 5. Test any batch create/update/delete operations (if applicible)

Reviewer: There is a typo in the `applicable` word.

I just tested ChatGPT with this and it spotted the typo 😄 
https://d.pr/i/fZSOJh

Additional tests can also be added to test the following general test scenarios:

- Basic positive tests (happy paths) - check basic functionality and the acceptance criteria of the API
- Extended positive testing with optional parameters - more thorough testing (can be used for testing a bug/updates/new functionality)
- Negative testing with valid input - expect to gracefully handle problem scenarios with valid user input e.g. trying to add an existing username

> - Negative testing with invalid input - expect to gracefully handle problem scenarios with invalid user input e.g. trying to add a username which is null

Reviewer: Should we maybe explain that with negative testing we intent to validate that we get error responses when expected as per specification and the error status code and message are correct as per documentation?

### Creating test structure

The structure of the test serves as a skeleton for the test itself. 

> Each test file requires the @playwright/test module to be imported as follows:

Reviewer 2: Minor formatting suggestion:

```suggestion
Each test file requires the `@playwright/test` module to be imported as follows:
```

```js
const { test, expect } = require( '@playwright/test' );
```
You can create a test by using the `test.describe()` and `test()` methods of Playwright:

- [`test.describe()`](https://playwright.dev/docs/api/class-test#test-describe-1) - creates a block that groups together several related tests;
- [`test()`](https://playwright.dev/docs/api/class-test#test-call) - actual method that runs the test.

Based on our example, the test skeleton would look as follows:

```js
test.describe( 'Coupons API tests', () => {
	test( 'can create a coupon', async ( {request} ) => {
    // test to create a coupon here
  } );

	test( 'can retrieve a coupon', async ( {request} ) => {
    // test to retrieve a coupon here
  } );

	test( 'can update a coupon', async ( { request } )  => {
    // test to update a coupon here
  } );
} );
```

Note: you can also nest a `test.describe()` inside a `test.describe()`. Example:

```js
test.describe('Orders API tests: CRUD', () => {
	let orderId; //test variable

	test.describe('Create an order', () => {
		test('can create a pending order by default', async ({request}) => {
      //test code here
    }
```

> This allows you to further subgroup tests. When viewing the tests results locally, each test describe 'level' will be separated by > as below: 

Reviewer 2: Minor formatting:

```suggestion
This allows you to further subgroup tests. When viewing the tests results locally, each test describe 'level' will be separated by `>` in the console as below: 
```

`Orders API tests: CRUD › Create an order › can create a pending order by default`

## Test Data Setup/Teardown

> You may need test data setup prior to the execution of your tests and removed after the execution of your tests. This can be achieved with 

Reviewer 2: Minor addition for clarity:

```suggestion
You may need test data setup prior to the execution of your tests and removed after the execution of your tests. This can be achieved with any of the following methods, depending on the needs of the test:
```

> You may need test data setup prior to the execution of your tests and removed after the execution of your tests. This can be achieved with any of the following methods, depending on the needs of the test:

Reviewer: I think "You may need test data setup prior to the execution of your tests and `make sure it is removed` after the execution of your tests" is more readable for me as a non-native English speaker.

- [`test.beforeAll()`](https://playwright.dev/docs/api/class-test#test-before-all) - runs before all the tests in file/group
- [`test.afterAll()`](https://playwright.dev/docs/api/class-test#test-after-all) - runs after all the tests in file/group
- [`test.beforeEach()`](https://playwright.dev/docs/api/class-test#test-before-each) - runs before each test in file/group

> - [`test.afterEach()`](https://playwright.dev/docs/api/class-test#test-after-each) - runs after each test in file/group

Reviewer: Would it be worth clarifying that the order execution is this or perhaps it would be too redundant?:
1. test.beforeAll()
2. test.beforeEach()
3. test.afterEach()
4. test.afterAll()

Author: I think it is worth re-ordering for emphasis

## Writing the test - a Quick Start Guide

> 1. Create test.js file inside the tests directory

Reviewer 2: Some suggestions for this list:

```markdown
1. Create `test.js` file inside the tests directory
2. Import `@playwright/test` module
3. Group tests with `test.describe()` methods
4. Add tests with `test()` methods
5. Separate data where required into files in the `data` directory 
6. After writing your tests, ensure all tests pass successfully with `pnpm test:api-pw`
```

2. Import [@playwright/test module
3. Group tests with test.describe() methods
4. Add tests with test() methods
5. Separate data where required into files in the data directory 
6. After writing your tests, ensure all tests pass successfully with `pnpm test:api-pw` before commiting to the codebase 

> If you have made updates to funcitonality that breaks the tests then then tests should be updated accordingly. Similarly, if there is new functionality added then new tests should be added.

Reviewer 2: Minor typo fixes:

```suggestion
If you have made updates to functionality that breaks the tests then the tests should be updated accordingly. Similarly, if there is new functionality added then new tests should be added.
```

> ## Examples

Reviewer 2: Love all these examples!

```

Verify [field types](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/d19c20491e5a7ade64c8fd530f01e0f3f3f7e29c/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/shipping/shipping-method.test.js#L85)
```js
expect(typeof responseJSON.id).toEqual('string');
```

Verify [field values](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/4ac1d822ac9082102536b0f7aa9cb0553965adaa/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/coupons/coupons.test.js#L186) 
```js
expect( updatedCoupons[ 1 ].amount ).toEqual( '25.00' );
```

Verify [field length](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/4ac1d822ac9082102536b0f7aa9cb0553965adaa/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/coupons/coupons.test.js#L136)
```js
expect( actualCoupons ).toHaveLength( expectedCoupons.length );
```

Verify search [headers](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/d19c20491e5a7ade64c8fd530f01e0f3f3f7e29c/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/orders/orders.test.js#L2703)
```js
// Verify total page count.
			expect( page1.headers()[ 'x-wp-total' ] ).toEqual(
				ORDERS_COUNT.toString()
			);
			expect( page1.headers()[ 'x-wp-totalpages' ] ).toEqual( '3' );
  ```

> Verify Variable [not undefined](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/778cb130f27d0dd0dc7da1acb0e89762f81c0f18/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/coupons/coupons.test.js#L31)

Reviewer: Should the `Variable` word be in lower-case?

```js
expect( couponId ).toBeDefined();
```

Verify [response contains an object](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/778cb130f27d0dd0dc7da1acb0e89762f81c0f18/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/coupons/coupons.test.js#L73)
```js
expect( await response.json() ).toEqual(
			expect.objectContaining( updatedCouponDetails )
		);
```

Verify [response contains an array containing an object](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/778cb130f27d0dd0dc7da1acb0e89762f81c0f18/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/coupons/coupons.test.js#L388)
```js
		expect( responseJSON.coupon_lines[ 0 ].meta_data ).toEqual(
			expect.arrayContaining( [
				expect.objectContaining( {
					key: 'coupon_data',
					value: expect.objectContaining( {
						code: testCoupon.code,
					} ),
				} ),
			] )
		);
```

## Debugging tests

> When debugging API tests, it is usually simple enough to add `console.log()` statements to output the values of your response/JSON/variables/status etc. Be sure to remove them when done ;) 

Reviewer 2: I noticed we're removing the reference to Playwright's debugging, does the debugging provided by Playwright not work well for API tests?

Author: Great question - The debugging provided by Playwright uses Playwright Inspector (a GUI tool) which operates only when there are browser interactions so it isn't applicable for API tests.
e.g if you were debugging one of the e2e tests you would make a call such as `npx playwright test example --debug` or pnpm equivalent which would fire up the inspector 
This wouldn't have any effect with the API tests. With that being said, I will remove the line mentioning `pnpm test:api-pw --debug (debug)` currently in the guide.

I also did a spot of googling and noticed a [feature request](https://github.com/microsoft/playwright/issues/19177) to to make debugging easier for API tests (added last week) - I have subscribed and if that comes to the fore then I will update accordingly

Reviewer 2: > I also did a spot of googling and noticed a https://github.com/microsoft/playwright/issues/19177 to to make debugging easier for API tests

Nice! That would be cool to have that feature added in.

Debating if it's worth noting that the Playwright debugger won't work for the API tests, so for now it's easier/best to use `console.log()` statements to debug? Additionally, I think we could recommend using a plugin to see the API requests within WordPress, something like [this plugin](https://wordpress.org/plugins/wp-rest-api-log/)?

Author: Fully agree with this - the comment should be updated for clarity and informational purposes - good shout 👍

Also - great suggestion on the plugin - I'll take a peek and see how it looks 🙌🏻

Reviewer 2: Thank you! The additions look good to me, thanks for adding this in!

```js
expect( couponId ).toBeDefined();
```

Verify [response contains an object](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/778cb130f27d0dd0dc7da1acb0e89762f81c0f18/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/coupons/coupons.test.js#L73)
```js
expect( await response.json() ).toEqual(
			expect.objectContaining( updatedCouponDetails )
		);
```

Verify [response contains an array containing an object](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/778cb130f27d0dd0dc7da1acb0e89762f81c0f18/plugins/woocommerce/tests/api-core-tests/tests/coupons/coupons.test.js#L388)
```js
		expect( responseJSON.coupon_lines[ 0 ].meta_data ).toEqual(
			expect.arrayContaining( [
				expect.objectContaining( {
					key: 'coupon_data',
					value: expect.objectContaining( {
						code: testCoupon.code,
					} ),
				} ),
			] )
		);
```

## Debugging tests

The Playwright debugger won't work for the API tests as it is based around GUI interactions.

For now it is simple enough to add `console.log()` statements to output the values of your response/JSON/variables/status etc. Be sure to remove them when done ;) 

> You can also use the handy [REST API Log](https://wordpress.org/plugins/wp-rest-api-log/) plugin to see the API request information within WordPress. It displays the details, request headers, query params, body params, body content, response headers and response body information.

Reviewer 3: Good call to suggest this plugin! Very helpful indeed when debugging.

Author: Glory goes to @zhongruige on this suggestion! I had a play about with the plugin and it looked great.
